Let's do this.
If this is your first vision Sunday, what happens now is that I spend the next little while talking about everything that God has done in the life of the church in this last calendar year and then Nikki will come up and she will share the vision that God has downloaded to us both for the coming year.
So normally, I have to go on double speed now.
I have to go on double speed so you know when you listen to some people's messages they're a bit slow so you just like times one and a half times two.
This is going to be at times two.
Last year I went for 25 minutes so I've practiced three times so far.
My best time is 12 and a half.
I am absolutely powering through.
I've been chopping loads of bits out too but it's all there.
It's going to be good.
Are you ready for sort of, let's say 13 because you always clap.
Let's go for 14.
But we're going to
We are going to have a look at the altar of thanksgiving for everything that God has done in us and through us this year.
Let's go, early years, little ones.
It continues to run here every Thursday morning and this year we have welcomed parents and carers, grandparents, child minders and expectant moms, along with children from birth to school age into this building.
The children enjoy play and creativity, stories, singing and snacks and the grown-ups are met with bottomless hot drinks, breakfast bars, conversation and support.
And what has been really beautiful this year is seeing families take ownership of the group, offering ideas, caring for one another and requesting prayer.
The vast majority of those who come here don't come to skylike on a Sunday, but they do leave knowing that they are safe here, that they are valued, they're deeply loved by a team who simply want to share the heart of Jesus with them.
Woo!
Belong!
Keep it short.
It's a three-second-clap max.
De-de-de-de-dot.
Actually, not three seconds, just out.
Okay, Belong continues to bring together the oldest and the youngest among us over tea, toast and jam.
Sounds good, I'd go for Marmite.
It's packed with singing, stories, sensory play and what happens is laughter wonderfully expected chaos and friendships that cross the generations from the youngest to the oldest.
It's a space that gently says, come as you are, you belong.
This year also saw early years family breakfasts and spontaneous outings creating relaxed no pressure spaces for young families to connect and
We have reimagined the crest where families can gather, build friendships and feel supported.
Seeking with kids, the kids' church continues to flourish.
We now have over 100 children registered with 50 to 60 up there every week.
Thank you for joining in and being part of the team moving forward.
We have seen children engaging deeply in worship upstairs, asking thoughtful questions and growing in their confidence and in their faith.
Over the summer holiday club welcomed 50 children for several days of festival style fun, helping children to discover that they are God's masterpiece, love beyond measure.
Our light party on the 31st of October welcomed 40 kids and their families celebrating Jesus, and this is the way to do it, with inflatables, craft, waffles and play.
That's a good way to celebrate Jesus.
And none of this happens without an incredible team of volunteers who faithfully show up week after week.
They're up there now.
Huge thanks to Leanne and the early years team, Anita and the kids team.
Right, it's time to look at youth.
What a year it has been for Skylar youth.
We have seen growth not just in numbers but in depth of relationships, in confidence and community.
Made possible by an outstanding team who pour in time, creativity, prayer, passion and love.
Tuesday youth continues to be a welcoming space to belong with games, snacks, prayers, toast.
You're hearing the theme here.
to the mix, seeing around 20 young people each week and on Sundays we often have 25 to 30 youth diving deeper into the Bible in interrelationship.
With the addition this year of an older youth group for year 11 and above, youth life group continues as a more intimate space for older youth gathering to chat, pray, read the Bible, do life and have fun together.
This year's youth events have included a pancake party, good, ninja warrior social, even better, taste and see, bonfire nights, Christmas filming, Christmas parties and a weekend away.
And there was loads of things on the list for this year coming, but there isn't time.
There's so much coming.
And here's some feedback from some of the parents to the youth team.
Firstly, we want to say
Thank you for making X feel so welcome at your youth club.
He's absolutely loving it, and he's made some lovely friends.
Another parent said, thank you for all you so into our young people.
It's so important, and I'm so thankful to you and the team.
Another said, thank you so much for all your kindness, support, generosity, and the time that you give to our children.
Thank you, Kate, Joel, the whole youth team.
You guys are epic.
Brilliant.
Senior Gold, from this end to this end, this is the other end of Belong.
Senior Gold provides a space for worship, prayer and fellowship for the older folk in our Skylark family.
This year, they also walk together through loss, remembering dearly-loved members of the fellowship.
Dot Flack passed away in May and Alan Seeger in July, and this team have held each other through those storms.
Mike, who heads it up, writes this, our opening message for the year was from Isaiah 43, forget the former things, do not dwell on the past.
See, I am doing a new thing.
And he said, that was spoken 700 years before Jesus, and it's still speaking to the most aided people in our congregation at this moment.
And they are saying this, how cool is this?
We do not want to let the past hinder us from experiencing God's will in the present.
Come on, senior gold.
You are leading the way.
Thank you, Mike, and the rest of the team.
Amazing.
Our Deaf congregation is going really well.
Val writes that there are generally about 20 people attending from as far as Ipswich and Wheelie, Rayleigh, Billerick, most of them coming from Chelmsford.
And there's also a monthly life group event that's held via Zoom.
Thank you, Val.
Thank you to the signing team.
We love our Deaf Church.
We are so glad you're here with us today.
authentic.
We took 51 men this year from across the church and the network to the late district for an amazing three days of walking and fellowship together.
Woo-hoo!
We had three men's breakfast amended and we focused on real tough topics like grief and mental health and how we can support and encourage each other and men need this stuff.
We also started doing a men's monthly pub night at the Fox and Raven tonight, 7.30, if you fancy coming.
Bismoke!
Every one of the bespoke, woo!
Every one of the bespoke brunches for our women have been a sold out success, literally sold out, with unbelievable food, Christine.
Top conversation, worship, inspiration and fun, and this year also saw the incredible launch of the bespoke collective back in June.
A gathering of over 100 women from across the UK for times of refreshing challenge, relating workshops, TED-style tours, worship and more.
Thank you to everyone involved with bespoke and authentic.
We move on to some very cool stats from our work into the community and our pastoral care.
Are you ready?
Go!
Over 1,100 meals have been cooked and delivered from this place to people in the community.
Over 230 food hampers have been delivered to people in our community.
250 girls have completed the Flourish self-esteem course across five high schools this year.
This year also a boys course has been written and we are ready to launch that into schools later this year.
You'll recall that we are a beacon church standing against domestic abuse and this year 53 victims and survivors of domestic abuse have been supported and also three domestic abuse training days have been delivered to other churches in Chelmsford from here.
That is so cool.
We have run four mental health and wellbeing courses in the prison.
We have supported 300 people through healthcare for the homeless.
We have provided over 500 breakfast bars to a local primary school.
We also have a bursary fund into primary schools where they can apply to us for things.
And this year we have supported more than 12 families across three schools with school uniforms, with coats when it's getting cold, school trips and after school clubs being funded, which is incredible.
We have also sent 66, this is a hard sentence to say, 66 sets of socks and chocks delivered to chess for the homeless.
Yes, it came out.
I'm never doing that again.
There were 12 pamper boxes delivered to the women's refuge.
We did one-to-one bereavement counseling for four students at Chelmsford College, which was so important.
Seven men gave their life to Jesus at Alpha in the prison, and this year we're gonna be running it every single week of the year.
We led six prison services.
On Sundays, we gave every man in terms of a prison a Mars bar, which may seem small, but every 660 Mars bars, given out as Christmas gifts, as part of their Christmas package this year given by us, we have supported people with court cases.
This is cool.
Who knew this?
for people in our community who need it, beds, washing machines, bunk beds, bedding for families in need.
You guys gave over £5,000 into the pastoral offering, which was distributed to people in this room to help them get through Christmas without having as much stress as they may have done.
There have been thousands of hugs, countless pastoral catch-ups, hospital visits, meal trains and many, many meetings that the pastoral team are sitting with you through.
Through partnerships with schools, with the prison, the council, the NHS and local agencies,
Skylark continues to show up with compassion, dignity and love.
Thank you, Eddie, Phil, Julie, Tina, Paula, Christine, Leslie and the huge team who make all of this possible.
Continuing on.
I know, you know normally, as I said, you can double the speed of things.
You can go back and watch this and just half the tempo and it'll be nice.
Nice cup of tea.
Okay, continuing on with Pastoral Care and Counseling, we have run two bereavement courses this year that have offered a safe and compassionate space to grieve and process loss.
Listen to this, our counseling team, which is currently 13 professionally trained volunteers, have supported 58 people voluntarily giving 1,112 hours of professional care, which would equate to approximately 60,000 pounds worth of counseling provision to people in this church and beyond.
How incredible is that?
The prayer chain has faithfully covered over 50 situations, including some life-threatening circumstances and prayers for babies and children.
So thank you to Liz and the
whole pastoral and counselling team.
Raising Larks, which is our adoption fostering special guardianship and kinship care group, is growing and going from strength to strength.
It supports 12 families directly at monthly gatherings and up to 25 families overall through wider connection and families have walked through loads of things together, new arrivals, children returning to their birth families or going to their forever home.
Wherever they are on their journey, they will find understanding, love and belonging.
And this is beautiful.
One child walked in and said they couldn't believe that everyone there was adopted or
just like them.
That sense of not being the only one has been deeply significant.
So thank you, Rach, and the Raising Labs team.
Hospitality continues to be one of the quiet strengths of Skylock.
What might look like simple acts, opening doors, making drinks, sharing meals, has again and again become the place where people first experience welcome belonging and love.
Here is a really powerful example of this.
Someone who walked into the building for the first time was met at the door, was escorted in, introduced to someone to sit with, spoken to by many people that morning.
After the service, they spent time in the connect area.
Then they joined Church Suite.
They attended DNA.
They went on to get baptized and be part of Alpha.
They began serving teas and coffees.
They joined a life group.
They built friendships.
They're now studying at Bible College and working for a Christian organization, all because someone chose to welcome
Well, this year we had three amazing connect lunches out there that Christine has put on for people with her amazing team.
On Christmas Day we had 40 people at the Christmas Day meal and here is a note from Christine.
The Christmas meal carried deep personal meaning for me.
I've known what it feels like to be alone at Christmas, missing connection and family.
To now be part of creating a place where people could experience warmth, welcome and community was incredibly healing.
Being able to offer that sense of family reminded me how God can redeem our painful seasons and use them to bless others.
Hospitality at Skylark is not about events, it's about presence and it changes lives.
So thank you Phil, Julie, Christine and everyone else who serves so beautifully.
This year, we have launched four new life groups.
As we said, we would.
We have trained life group leaders and connected over 50 people into life groups.
20 people completed the alpha course.
We had five baptism.
We've got another baptism on the 1st of February coming up.
Our DNA courses have helped many to find out more about this amazing church family and to begin to call this place home.
Our worship team has facilitated countless Sundays and brunches and breakfast collectives and counters to all of you.
Thank you.
Our prayer team has stood alongside hundreds
of us just when we've needed it and we are grateful.
Thank you to everyone.
Nearly there, last page, more than 1,300 people came through the building across our three Christmas services and our online services have been watched over 11,000 times.
Thank you to everybody involved in all of that.
Church life team, thank you for the team who come here every month and help notices to be fun.
From slides to flyers, magnets to graphics, videos to lanyards.
Graphics team, thank you.
From a revamp downstairs toilet, pigeon evictions.
Like, could you not?
We've had pigeon evictions this year.
Painting maintenance and other practical upgrades.
These chairs have been moved so many times.
The individual chairs have been moved 13,000 times.
And this room has been vacuumed so many times by people you don't
even know who they are.
And we are so thankful for those who served behind the scenes.
We have had deeper, teach, dedications, young adults growing together in friendship, genuine connection and spiritual growth, and so much year.
What a year 2025 was to every volunteer, to every leader, to every unseen servant, to those who prayed, who cooked, who lifted, who listened, who cleaned, who filmed, who cared, who served, who loved, who gave, who welcomed, who showed up.
Thank you.
This is what God has done among us, and we give him all the glory.
If you'd like to look at the screen, you're going to see our We See A Church vision video.
It's going to take you, but it's going to take too long.
It's going to kill all the time.
We watch it that slowly.
We see a church.
So I think what we may do is watch that later.
And Nicky is now going to come up, if it doesn't worry, I'm sorry.
It might take just a moment to get ready.
Nicky's going to pop up and share with us this vision that God has downloaded to us at the start of this really important year in the life of the church.
Morning everyone.
Wow.
Pete, firstly, well done.
That was the fastest you've ever done that.
It didn't feel like it lost any impact in the speed, did it?
Maybe for some of us it did, but it was, it's so mind-blowing actually to see how much happens in and through the life of the church.
Often we are so kind of engrossed in our own little pocket.
We see a church vibrant in praise, surrendering worship and passionate about church.
We see a church centered around the presence of God, ignited by the love of God, well fueled by the Word of God.
I suppose I need to clarify a couple of things.
When we talk about God downloading vision
He's already done that and it's out in the foyer for everybody to read and we could have played the video and perhaps we'll put that out over our socials and via email just so that we can have a refresher.
But if you want to know the church that we see, it is emblazoned on the walls of the foyer for everybody to read and that has not changed.
So when we talk about vision, we're not changing that vision.
There is still more for us to step into when it comes to that vision.
But
Each year, we take ourselves away in the summer and we spend time saying to God, what do you want to highlight?
Which aspect of that vision are you really wanting to bring into sharp focus?
Is there something fresh that you want us to catch a hold of?
And this summer was no exception to that.
And interestingly, this is, as Pete has already mentioned,
our centenary year as a church, a hundred years since the vision began.
And last week, for those of us who were here or who tapped in online, you will have seen the unfolding story that began with a woman called Rose Wibrow and currently
has unfolded all the way to this point right now.
And we're excited because there's a sense in which this year is a really significant one for us as a church.
There's something so special and poignant about that.
When we were away in the summer, God gave us the word generations.
And it's easy to interpret that word
as kids and youth.
And we love our kids and we love our youth and you've heard so much about that this morning.
But actually, as we've spent time praying and thinking and pondering about this word, generations, there's a real sense that it's broader than just that.
As we stand on the cusp of this centenary year, as we get ready to celebrate, I said to the team this week, wildly, we're going to celebrate wildly in October when we hit that centenary moment.
But as we step into that year, the question really is this, what could exist for generations to come at the end of the next 100 years if we collectively and individually stepped
into the story that God is writing in and through this beautiful church.
What legacy do we want to leave behind us for the generations coming through?
And so yes, of course, our kids and our youth are a really important part of that, but we're actually thinking a century down the line.
What will exist if we say our courageous yes and step wholeheartedly into the story?
And we have a sense at the start of this really special year that this is more than a new vision for a new year.
It's actually more than a new season which is such a churchy phrase that we use all the time.
God's doing a new thing.
We're often stepping into a new season.
It's not even that.
We have a sense that what is unfolding this year is the start of a new era.
for Skylark Church.
And it's been a really interesting past year, certainly from our vantage point leading the church.
The headlines, as you have heard, have been so incredible.
We have seen things happen this year that we could only have longed
prayed for in years gone by and I think it was summed up for me in one beautiful week in the life of the church where we invited people to step into a relationship with Jesus here in the gathering and seven people responded and that same week just a few days later seven
men in Chelmsford prison gave their lives to Jesus through prison alpha, and it felt like this beautiful joining up.
What's happening here in the house, also happening out there in our local community as we have been faithfully sowing for years, it was exciting.
So the headlines have been incredible.
We've seen disciples made, our life groups have been trained and multiplied, community workers expanded,
beautiful moments of symmetry we've got so much to be thankful for and yet this last year has been so intense for so many of us it feels that amidst the many blessings there have been some seismic battles we have watched and walked alongside so many key people in the life of this beautiful church family
who have been facing difficult circumstances.
And that's always there in a church this size, but it's felt disproportionate.
There's been pain and sickness, struggle, loss, bereavement, adversity, redundancy, and some absolutely gigantic pastoral situations coexisting alongside all these incredible God headlines.
And the two of us, we haven't been immune from that either.
We lost Pete's dad towards the start of last year.
It was February of last year.
And from sort of this point last year onwards, we were back and forth to the hospital alongside juggling family life and leading a church and a network.
It was full on.
And we found ourselves in the heat of battle behind the scenes for most of last year.
contending for some things that really matter, some things in the life of the church that need to endure that have been in danger of being lost.
It's been a costly stretch, hasn't it, for so many of us.
But as we have prayed and ruminated on
this centenary year and this sense that there is something for us to leave for generations to come.
I feel like what God has done is he's allowed us to look back on some of those more difficult parts of last year and to make sense of the struggle.
Now that doesn't diminish the pain that many of us have felt this year.
In any way, that doesn't go away because I'm about to say this.
but it does give us a spiritual insight into why it's been such an intense time.
You see, we're stepping into more than a new year at Skylop Church.
It's more than a new season.
It's the start of a new era.
And there is a new church rising out of this existing church, a new church
for a new generation.
And that's why the struggle has been so intense and so strategic.
Rick and Bev, who founded our network and who pasted the church, you would have seen Bev talking on the video last week.
They always used to say that every seven years a new church has to rise out of the existing church.
Now that doesn't mean that everything changes beyond recognition overnight.
That's not what I'm saying.
But there's this sense in which in order for a church to continue to grow, to continue to flourish, to not stagnate and become stale,
There has to be this newness that rises, a new church that will reach a new generation.
And there's something about the number seven in the Bible.
It's that number of completion.
It's an important number.
Interestingly, this very week sees us, Peter and I step into our 14th year of leading the church.
That's two lots of seven.
Seven years ago, we took on leading the network.
There was this sort of newness that came to us as a church family as we broadened our canopy, we broadened our mission field and horizons.
But there's a sense in which there's no accident that this is that 14th year.
There is a new church that needs to rise for a new generation.
It's an epoch change.
And perhaps in some ways that makes sense of why the battle that has led up to this point, the struggle that so many of us have felt and experienced has been so intense.
Because when change is happening or about to happen, there are certain things that should come through and we have to contend for those things, but there are absolutely things that have to go as well.
This new era that we are about to step into comes with a command and a promise.
So here's the command, first of all.
It's from Isaiah 60, verse one, and I'm reading from the amplified version on purpose.
It says this.
Arise, and it's actually in capital letters, which I also love because that means this is important.
Arise from the depression and prostration in which circumstances have kept you.
Rise to a new life.
Shine, be radiant with the glory of the Lord, for your light has come, and the glory of the Lord has risen upon you.
It's time, Skylark Church, for us to arise.
To arise from some of those circumstances that have kept us low, that word prostration means keeping us low, keeping us limited, keeping us squashed down.
And it's also time for us to shine.
And this shine in this context, it's not a command to let our good deeds shine.
You've just heard the list.
Our good deeds definitely are shining in dark places.
There's no doubt about that.
But make no mistake, this command is not about that.
We are great as a church at the activity.
We're really good at stepping in and stepping up to the plate when it comes to serving and blessing our community.
And we won't stop doing that.
But this is a command to shine and be radiant with the glory of the Lord.
This is a significant era that we're stepping into because our activity is going to flow in increasing measure from a radiance that only comes from time in the glory of God, the glorious presence, that extra quality that comes from each of us as we have spent time with Jesus.
We're being asked to shine and be radiant with His glory
And yes, the darkness may seem so very great, but this is our era to shine even more brightly with his radiant presence, the love, the peace, and the hope of Jesus, a rise and shine.
To step into this brave new church that is going to arise out of our existing church,
which is already super beautiful, by the way.
There is nothing wrong with this beautiful church family.
But in order to step into the new, something has to die.
And I think that the struggle that so many of us has been in has actually been about something internally needing to die inside of us.
Some of us have been in the process of dying.
I don't mean actually dying.
but there's been stuff that has had to die within us, old stuff that can't carry forward into the new era ahead.
Now, when Peter and I met many, many years ago, now long before we were even part of this church or even dreamt that we might one day lead this church, the very first day we met, we sat under some teaching and the verse, the central verse was this,
Joshua 1 verse 2, which says this, Moses, my servant, is dead.
Now you, and there's this command for Joshua to lead the people from the wilderness and to cross over into the promised land.
Moses, my servant, is dead.
Something has to die before we can step into the next part.
And when we first stepped into leading the church, one of the things that Rick and Bev prayed over us is that we were Joshua leaders.
They were Moses leaders and we were to be Joshua leaders.
And I feel that this is a really important threshold moment today, where there's an invitation for us, not only to step into the story,
but actually to cross over into the new that God has already begun.
And our job for the foreseeable is going to be to help us cross over.
It's like there's a line in the sand and God is calling us to cross from the wilderness from some of those more difficult, dry places into the promised land.
It's time for us to cross over.
But before we do,
I want to say this.
It's okay to lament that which has been lost along the way.
It's okay for us to grieve some of those things that we can't carry forward with us.
And we've spent quite a long time during the Christmas break doing that personally.
There's been a real intentional time for us of letting go of some of the disappointments
the very real loss and bereavement that we experienced last year, the cumulative effect of years of sometimes painful and costly decisions.
There's a unique pain and hardship that comes with leadership at times, as well as the beautiful joys and the blessings.
I wonder what it is for each of us that we can't take with us into this new era.
There's stuff that we need to let go of and that's going to be an ongoing process.
It's not just going to happen in an instant.
Moses is dead.
We can't get back some of what's gone, not everything.
can come forward with us into the new era.
And it's time for us to step forward.
And in that process, there's a letting go that has to happen.
And for some of us, that might be attitudes of heart.
It might be the way that we see things or do things.
It could be patterns or cycles in our lives.
Let's call it the old me.
But some of it is also the old season, the former things, that which is good, but it's just not for now.
I love that Mike Collins picked up on forget the former things.
For behold, I'm doing a new thing.
Whenever God is doing a new thing, he wants us to turn our gaze there.
And that means forgetting the former things, letting some of those things go.
They were great, but they're not for now.
The winter is past.
The season of singing has come.
The season has changed, and it's time for us to cross over.
And in Isaiah 60, verse one, that beautiful command to arise and shine.
It's clear that so many of our great people in Skylar Church have been subdued by really difficult stuff.
And I can't stand here and promise you that this next year won't bring hardship.
I can't promise you that this next century won't be tough.
But there's a choice for us to make this year and in this new era.
And it's an internal choice.
Will we arise from those circumstances that have kept us low?
Will we stand up in the spirit?
Will we arise to a new life, a renewal of our minds, our hearts?
And will we choose to radiate his glory?
Because we can experience hard circumstances and still radiate his glory, and so many of you do.
But as we arise and as we shine, as we follow that commandment that we've been given, there is also a promise.
And I just want to explain that this is not a verse that Peter and I would generally be drawn to.
And initially, it might sound like a braggy verse.
I just want to say, please don't receive it in that way at all.
This is honestly a verse that we feel that God has given us.
And it's from the book of Haggai, which is
The book from which a foundational verse when the church began, what came from.
And I think that the whole book of Haggai is actually really key for us in this new era.
But this is what the God has spoken to us and I'll unpack in a moment what we understand by that.
This beautiful promise.
The glory of this present house will be greater
then the glory of the former house says the Lord Almighty.
And in this place, I will grant peace, declares the Lord Almighty.
Listen, listening to some of those stories last week, a couple who would leave two of their children behind and travel halfway across the world to pick up a dwindling, decaying, dying church.
or a woman who would look out of her window and at great cost to herself, welcome in children as a Sunday school.
It's undeniable that the glory of the former house, the things that God has done have been so mind-blowing.
It would be easy to think that the glory days were behind us.
We can think of so many things that God has pioneered, so many highlights to date.
So when this promise was whispered into our ear for our next 100 years as a church, it blew our minds.
The glory days aren't behind us, Skylark Church, they're ahead of us.
We haven't seen anything yet because this new church is going to be filled with his glory.
Now by that we're not talking about prominence or fame.
We do not aspire to be a church where people seek us out from all across the world where we are known, everybody knows our name.
That's not what we're talking about here.
We want to be a church that houses the glory of God.
his heavy, weighty, incredible presence that changes lives, the presence that heals, restores, and transforms, the glory that strengthens people to such a degree that no matter what they face, they are still radiating his love.
And that's what is meant here.
The glory of the house is exactly that.
It's the bit that shines out of each of us.
because we have had so much time in this sustaining, good for us, life-changing, powerful presence of God.
The glory that brings peace, that brings wholeness.
And this is a season where we believe God is going to pour his glory into our church.
And I feel that listening to that long list, there's a teeny, tiny danger that our activity could overtake
our capacity and our desire to behold His glory.
We don't want to become a stale, stagnating place that has loads of projects and activities, but is spiritually dry and in decline.
There is a new church that must rise for a new season.
We've become familiar with doing so much, and it's great.
We love all the things that we do.
But if we just do them because we've always done them, they lose the glory of God that is contained within.
And this new era is about a pendulum
that our activity will flow from his glory as opposed to the other way round.
We see a church vibrant in praise, surrendered in worship and passionate about prayer.
And that's the church that we want to lead.
I want to lead a church that can't wait to pray because we know that God is going to answer our prayers, that he hears us, that things change when we pray, that we're changed as we pray.
We want to lead a church that erupts with worship, but then carries that spirit of worship out into the way we live our lives, the way we parent our kids, the way we show integrity in our workplace, the way we reach out, roll up our sleeves and get alongside our community, the way in which we impact nations.
We want to reclaim some of those things.
That looks like the living, breathing, glory of God, and that we can't do.
That's for all of us to do.
The only way that we can host the glory of God is for every single person to climb the mountain and say, God, I want to host your presence.
I want to welcome and usher in that new glory that you have for me.
The season has changed.
We're stepping into a new era and it's time for us to cross over.
And with that, there is a call and an invitation to new passion.
Many of us have lost passion.
It's been eroded by our circumstances and over time.
And I wonder if some of us are here today and we just feel like all we have is a tiny flickering flame.
we went to retreat on retreat for a day at the start of this week and it was really funny because there's a little chapel where we went and outside the chapel they have rows of tea lights and you know when you're invited to light a candle and so Pete lit his candle from another candle and wish it went up beautifully so strong and I lit my candle
And it was sputtering, and it was tiny, and it was totally pathetic.
And it looked as though it was about to go out.
I said, oh, Pete, that's not a good picture for the start of this year.
But it's kind of how I was feeling.
I felt like it was such a tough year in some ways for us that my passion had waned.
I just felt, you know, when that happens to me, I'm such an enthusiastic, passionate person.
You know it's bad.
So I'm looking at this little candle.
I'm trying to blow on it.
just gently without blowing it out, but just to try and kindle something.
And then Pete just gave it a jolt and boom, off it went.
And we came back an hour later and I was thinking, please God, don't let my candle have gone out because that's just going to be so sad.
But no, there it was.
And by then it was shining equally brightly.
But I think that's just a beautiful visual picture of how it's been for many of us.
Yes.
We need to lament that Moses is dead.
There are things that have been really hard, and I am not making light of that.
But God says that he won't break a bruised reed and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out.
We can bring him the embers.
We can bring him those bits and say, you know what, God, I've lost passion in this area as it's been tough or I've lost vision for this as it's been hard.
It's okay to lament, but we can't stay there.
God,
We want to bring you the tiny sparks that still remain and ask for your life-giving spirit, your ruach breath to come and ignite fresh passion for a fresh season.
And there's this beautiful, beautiful verse in Haggai chapter 1.
The Lord is basically calling them to rebuild the house, and there's loads I could go into, but time does not permit this morning on that.
But there's this moment where he calls them to rebuild the house, and then he says, God says, I am with you.
And it says, so the Lord sparked the enthusiasm of Zerubbabel.
He's the guy that's leading, and Jeshua, he's the high priest, and the enthusiasm of the whole remnant of God's people.
they began to work on the house of their gods.
And I love that idea of sparking enthusiasm.
It's that thing, isn't it?
It's of passion.
And some translations say, God stirred up the spirit, that same Ruach breath, the life-giving spirit that caused dry bones to live, the same Ruach breath that spoke into and hovered over the void that breathed life
into the dust and created mankind.
The Holy Spirit wants to breathe on each of us, a fresh enthusiasm, a fresh passion for building the house, and that can only come from God.
But there is a re-ignition of passion that He is wanting to inject into us.
With a new era comes a new song.
We are Skylarks.
I sat on my own on Ears Eve, and I knew I needed to do some lamenting of my own.
And to be really vulnerable with you, I spent a good few hours crying on my own with the Lord, just saying, God,
There's stuff I need to let go of to be able to move in.
There's so much that we can see for our church, Peter and I, that God has given us vision for.
But the passion inside of me had dwindled somewhat because it's been tough and painful.
And so I sat there and let all of that come out.
And the one thing that I knew beyond a shadow of a doubt is that our season isn't done yet,
because he's called us to raise a generation of 24, seven worshipers, those skylarks who will sing in the darkness, those skylarks who will look at the darkness and not be afraid, but look beyond to what God is doing, to sing an anthem of hope, an anthem of freedom, an anthem of peace, an anthem of healing, an anthem of worship.
And until such time as we have completed that work, we have work to do.
There's a new song for us to find.
And last week we had different prayer stations.
There was vision and passion over here.
And there was 24-7 worship here.
And there were two others.
But I went straight over to vision and passion for the reasons that I've just outlined.
And then I came over to 24-7 worship.
And the coolest thing happened.
As I began to pray for our church, as I began to say, you know what, God, I long for us to be a church that is so passionate about you, that we have a song, not just here on a Sunday, but in every season of our lives, through the loss, through the difficulty, through the adversity, that we hold on to that hope that we are anchored.
And as I prayed, it was like, whoosh, it was just like that sputtering candle outside the chapel,
I just ignited a fresh and it was this beautiful confirmation from God.
Yes, this is right.
There's a new song for a new season.
We are Skylax.
It's time to awaken the dawn with our songs.
Chompsford is the birthplace of radio.
You've heard us say this before, but there is a sound to be released from this place that will bless the nations.
It's a sound of courage.
It's a sound of truth.
It's a sound of life and hope.
And it's happening already through our beautiful networks, Skylark International.
But there's so much more to come.
We are called to raise up generations of worshipers and that work is not done yet.
But we can't do it without the glory and the presence of God.
We can't just have great activity, but be missing real relationship with Jesus.
We've prayed our prayers.
We've made our plans.
If you're not in it, we don't want it.
Oh God, would you move?
It's interesting that the headlines today in Sky News are as follows.
Why is God making a comeback with Gen Z?
And why more young people are flocking to church?
Right, listen.
Gen Z are after an authentic
encounter with God.
They don't care about slick church.
They don't care about any of that.
They're not that interested in projects, although they'll get stuck in.
The thing that they are craving is relationship and connection, firstly, vertically, and secondly, horizontally, real, meaningful, discipling community.
That is the church that we want to lead into the future.
It's time for a new church to rise.
What are we going to leave for the next generation Skylark church?
It's not about a bigger building, although maybe in time that might emerge.
It's not about housing more projects and good deeds into the community, although this will likely come from spending time in the presence of God.
It's bigger than the here and now.
We want to raise up a generation of
hearts that howls the glory of God, wherever he's placed them, hearts that howls the presence of God, that spirit of 24-7 worship that is built into the core and then released out to disciple others, the torch bearers who come are ignited and carry the flame out.
Thank you for that picture, Bill.
It was so powerful.
a sound released from this place that will withstand hardship and pressure, which is surely only going to intensify in the times we find ourselves, and a whole-hearted spirit that will continue to worship and follow God despite the darkness.
It's a new era.
And last but by no means least, that era is going to lead to new life.
There's an urgency over this.
The church with a capital C will not survive if we don't step up to host the presence of God and pass it on to the next generations.
There's new life on the horizon for us.
And it looks like all of the things that we heard about and more.
But there's one other thing that I want to speak about when it comes to new life
Seven years ago, Peter Knight said yes to God to lead our beautiful movement, Skylark International, forward.
It's a network of churches and church plants.
It was pioneered from here, birthed from this very church.
We planted the first church into Malden.
And back then, when the network began with Rick and Bev, long before our time, everybody was on board with that because it was super costly.
It was that moment of we are giving out a whole bunch of people into Malden and we've gone on to plant churches.
Most recently we planted a church into Woodford with Niger, Nikki Langford.
It's been part of our DNA.
But over time, as we've grown as a church, we have become so good at building this church.
But I wonder if at times it may have been to the detriment of that beautiful network that we
gave life to.
And we have found ourselves this last year, contending really strongly for the survival and the future of the network.
Now that's not because it isn't growing.
It's grown unrecognizably.
We now have beautiful charities in our midst.
We have kingdom ambassadors.
We have so many ministries.
We've got people who have moved their whole family into the most deprived
area of Glasgow and are doing a kind of expression of church that is new and different with their whole family.
We've got people in Uganda, people that you will never meet probably who are blessed because we as a church gave life to this incredible network.
But as we have become so focused on local
We've lost sight of our mission field, and it's been really uncomfortable this year.
Peter and I wrestling with that.
And I guess the only way I can describe it, and I'm very thankful to someone sitting in this room who helped us process all of this.
We sat for four really strategic days to talk all of this through, and it was invaluable.
But this is the only way I can describe it.
This is how it looks at the moment.
We've got Skylark Church here,
We've got Skylark International, our network there.
And there's some through flow in both directions.
There are people from the church who are really invested into Skylark International, a handful of us.
And occasionally we're blessed by someone coming to speak from the network here.
And that's probably about as much as most of us know.
But that's not how it began.
And something has been lost in that.
And as we prayed and processed, and as we felt this real uncomfortable thing, that this thing that began from here, that should not be lost, because it is making such a difference to hold demographics of society, we saw this picture instead.
You see, here's Skylock Church, and we gave life, new life to that thing that is the network.
And we will not stop investing into our local community.
That is a huge part of our mission field.
But we are also called to invest to the ends of the earth.
And our primary vehicle for that is actually our Skylark international community.
And somehow it feels as though there's this unique part of our heritage that shouldn't be lost.
These concentric circles, this ripple effect,
but it's hanging in the balance right now and it needs a scaffold from this church and a simulation back into our heart, into our core for it to succeed.
And that is in prayer, it's in passion and it's in practical ways too.
As I come into land, in 1957, there was a mission called Skylark.
Britain joined the Space Race with the launch of its first rocket, and it was used by scientists to investigate Earth's upper atmosphere and carry out pioneering space research.
Over 48 years, a total of 441 Skylark missions were launched, making it one of the longest and most successful rocket programs in the world.
I think that's significant.
You see, we are in the process of launching missions all the time into different communities across the UK and across the world, and most of us don't even know it's happening.
But we see a church where Skylark is the Cape Canaveral of the network, launching new life-giving, kingdom growth initiatives across the UK and beyond.
This beautiful movement that came from us
assimilated once again into our hearts, into our prayer and into our missional mindset.
There is new life to be released as we come into a close right now.
It's time.
There's a brave new church rising for a brave new generation.
There's new glory for us to behold and to house.
There's new passion that God is wanting to kindle in every heart.
There is a new song, time for us to wake the dawn and become that generation of 24-7 worshipers for our children, our children's children and far beyond.
And there is new life, both locally, nationally and internationally, that God is wanting us to steward.
it's time to cross over.
And I wonder if you will be part of stepping into the story with us at the start of this new era.
Would you stand?
Thank you for listening for such a long time.
Just felt really important to share all of that with us this morning.
Please do go back and have another listen when you have a move.
And we will continue to unpack different strands as we move forwards.
But for now, we want to give us a chance to respond.
Firstly, you have a beautiful fridge magnet to take away with you.
And this is, it's a poem that was found in Rose Wybrows Bible after she passed.
And it feels really significant for us to have that in our homes, in our
in our orbit this coming year as we step into a new era.
But secondly, we'd like to invite you to respond collectively with us.
We're going to do things a little bit differently this morning.
There's no obligation to do this.
If you're not ready, if you still have lamenting to do, that is absolutely fine.
But for those of us who are just feeling that ignition this morning, in front of me here,
There is a line of white tape, and it says, step into the story.
And we're going to just form a clockwise procession for once we're better at going.
It's OK.
So it's just.
teaching in a French classroom versus on a field.
So yeah, everyone's going to move.
Anyone who wants to do this is just going to make their way in that direction.
So if you're here, you can go up the middle.
That's fine.
Come up the middle anywhere.
But ultimately, to get yourselves round, if you want to step over this line, which says, I am up for it this year into this new era, I want to step into the story.
When you get here, don't stop.
You'll be trampled.
Keep going until you end up back in your seats again.
Brilliant.
So when you're ready, whenever you're ready, why don't you make your way round and we're going to cross over together its time Skylar Church.
Let the new church rise.